---
layout: single
category: courses
title: "LAST CLASS: Final Project Presentations"
permalink: /courses/earth-analytics/earth-analytics-final-week/
modified: '2018-01-10'
week-landing: 15
week: 15
sidebar:
  nav:
comments: false
author_profile: false
course: "earth-analytics"
module-type: 'session'
---


{% include toc title = "This Week" icon = "file-text" %}

<div class="notice--info" markdown="1">

## <i class="fa fa-ship" aria-hidden="true"></i> Welcome to Week {{ page.week }}!

Welcome to week {{ page.week }} of Earth Analytics! This week you will present
final projects!

</div>

|  Time | Topic   | Speaker   |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| 9:30 - 12:00  | Final Group Presentations   |   |
|===
| 12:10 - 12:20  | Wrap Up |   |


### 2. Complete the Assignment Below (3 participation points)

#### Submit Your Group Reviews to Qualtrics by Tuesday 19 December 2017 @ 8pm

**Notes:**

* You can always watch a presentation again online if you wish through D2L!
* No evaluation forms submitted after 8pm on Tuesday will be graded / accepted - the evaluation form will be closed!
* Once you start your evaluation in Qualtrics, you will want to complete it. It is difficult to go back and edit it!

<div class="notice--warning" markdown="1">

## <i class="fa fa-pencil-square-o" aria-hidden="true"></i> Assignment - Review Other Presentations

### Complete the Assignment Below:

For this week you will review *atleast* 5 other presentations during
class. Please submit your review to Qualtrics using the survey link in the google doc below. Please
be sure to add your first and last name and email to the Qualtrics form so we can
count your review when we grade!

**IMPORTANT: PLEASE use the Same EMAIL each time you submit your feedback. Use your CU email.**

<a class="btn .btn--x-large btn-info" href="https://docs.google.com/document/d/1tu6ucxFK7nZ09iUO4UtKQPJh0ybW7m8rp6M44gCMLyQ/edit#heading=h.rvq3qn19vd5y" target= "_blank"> <i class="fa fa-file-text" aria-hidden="true"></i>
FOR COURSE STUDENTS ONLY: Google Doc with Course Schedule, Review Assignments and Qualtrics Survey. </a>

Because you may want to revise your review before submitting it to us and your classmates,
we created a google doc that you can use to take notes during class. You don't have
to use it. We just thought it might be helpful.


#### BONUS (1 Bonus Homework Point):
Review *atleast* 2 additional presentations to receive an additional homework point.


### Participation
Because there won't be a lot of time for questions after each presentation, please
leave any questions that you have for a group in piazza under the groups name.
The group can then see your question and answer them!

Please also be sure to ANSWER any questions that are asked of your group. Asking
and answering questions will count towards your participation grade for this week.

</div>

### 2. Final Project Due Dec 18 @9am

Be sure to submit your final project report to D2L by Monday December 18 at 9am !
[Click here for more information about your final project]({{ site.url }}/courses/earth-analytics/final-project/)
