---
layout: single
title: "Geography 4163 & 5163 Earth Analytics Spring 2017 Syllabus"
excerpt: "."
authors: ['Leah Wasser']
category: [course-materials]
permalink: /course-materials/earth-analytics/geog-4100-5100-syllabus
nav-title: 'Instructor Notes'
sidebar:
  nav: earth-analytics-2017
author_profile: false
comments: false
---


## Lead Instructor

Dr. Leah A Wasser
Office. S346 SEEC
Ph. 303.735.4637
leah.wasser@colorado.edu

<div class='notice--success' markdown="1">

# Where & When

* **Teaching Assistant:** Sepideh Khanghah
* **Time:** Wednesday 3:00 pm -  5:50 pm
* **Location:** SEEC S125

**Contributing Instructors:**

  </div>

## Course Description

## Learning Outcomes

At the end of this course you will be able to:

* Open and visualization various types of data using the `R` programming languages.
* Be able to navigate and use the `RStudio` eniroronment for R.
* Be able to describe and apply several approaches to efficient computing including parallelization


## Grading
Grading will be based on the following course assignments. Late assignments will
receive a 10% deduction per 24-hour period after the due date/time.

| Assignment  | Percent of Credit   |
|---|---|---|---|---|
|  Exercises | 25% |
|  Mid Term | X% |
|  Group Presentation | #  |
| Class Participation | X% |


## Attendance:

Attending all classes is required. In the event that you must miss a class due
to a university-approved activity, illness, injury, family emergency, or religious
observance, you must notify me, preferably before the day of class, and the absence
will be excused. Students will be given a reasonable amount of time to make up the
work based on the type of assignment missed and the reason for their absence.
Unexcused absences will indirectly affect the student’s grade because regular
participation is a requirement of this course.


## Readings

* NOTE, readings are subject to change or additional ones added. Appropriate notice will be given if readings do change.
